Which is worse?
To stumble others or to be stumbled?
From Jehovah’s viewpoint,
both are serious matters
that can affect our lives
and also the lives of others.
But today, we’re going to focus
on the matter of being stumbled
because our text urges us:
“Do not be quick to take offense.”
James 3:2 warns us
that “we all stumble many times.”
We don’t want to misunderstand these words
and say that it’s OK to be stumbled.
It’s not providing an excuse.
Rather, James simply stated a reality
of our imperfect lives.
The important thing, then, is,
What do we do when we run
into a potential stumbling block?
Proverbs 24:16 tells us:
“The righteous one may fall even seven times,
and he will certainly get up.”
Let’s consider what might cause us to stumble
and how we can avoid being stumbled.
Some causes of stumbling are injustices
on the part of our fellow believers.
It could be persecution, tribulation,
or it may be the imperfections of others.
Any one of these obstacles could cause us
to trip, to stumble, or even to fall down.
How can we prevent these stumbling blocks
from turning into roadblocks
that stop our forward movement
in Jehovah’s service?
Please open your Bibles to Psalm 119.
We’ll read verse 165.
This scripture provides
a simple answer to that question,
and it also assures us
that we can avoid being stumbled
—Psalm 119:165:
“Abundant peace belongs to those
who love your law;
nothing can make them stumble.”
Why not?
Because if we love Jehovah’s law,
Jehovah will not allow us to be stumbled.
Our deep love for him and for his law
will prevent that from happening.
Some of the most common stumbling blocks
result from the imperfections of others.
I’d like to reflect on two experiences
that illustrate how we can avoid
letting such problems
become a permanent stumbling block.
The first experience is
of Sister Goldie Romocean.
She was born in Romania in 1903.
She was baptized in 1918.
In 1921, she immigrated to the United States,
and that same year she married
a Romanian brother from her hometown.
They settled in Akron, Ohio,
and had four daughters.
In the mid-1930’s,
Goldie and her husband were stumbled.
Listen to Goldie as she explains
why they were stumbled
and what helped them to regain their balance.
She related:
‘I became angry
with Brother Rutherford.
‘A new Witness felt that Brother Rutherford
‘had dealt unjustly with him,
not hearing him out.
‘I felt that Brother Rutherford was wrong.
‘Well, one Sunday my sister Mary
and her husband, Dan, came to visit us.
‘After dinner Dan said:
“Let’s get ready to go to the meeting.”
‘“We don’t go
to the meetings anymore,” I said.
‘“We’re mad at Brother Rutherford.”
‘Dan asked: “Did you know
Brother Rutherford when you got baptized?”
‘“Of course not,” I replied.
‘“You know I got baptized in Romania.”
‘“Well, why did you get baptized?” he asked.
‘“Because I learned
that Jehovah is the true God,
‘and I wanted to dedicate my life
to serve him,” I answered.
‘“Never forget that! ” Dan replied.
‘“What if Brother Rutherford
left the truth, would you leave too?”
‘“Never, never!” I said.
‘That brought me to my senses, and I said:
‘“Everybody get ready for the meeting.”
And we haven’t stopped since.’
Jehovah continued to bless
Goldie and her family.
For example, her daughter Beth
graduated from the 14th class of Gilead.
The moving account of Goldie’s life story
can be found in the April 1, 1997,
issue of The Watchtower.
By all means, go back and read it.
You will not only be encouraged
but you’ll also learn
how she got the name Goldie.
Is there a lesson here for us?
Yes.
Goldie and her family
avoided permanent stumbling
by staying focused on the big picture
—that is, Jehovah’s sovereignty
and their personal relationship with him.
Now let’s consider a second experience.
When I read the text for today,
I immediately thought of Brother Adolf Weber.
I first read his experience 38 years ago
in the 1980 Yearbook.
Obviously, his experience
made a lasting impression
on my mind and heart.
Adolf Weber was a Swiss woodcutter.
His job was cutting down trees.
In the mid-1890’s,
he traveled to the United States.
He worked as a part-time gardener
for Brother Russell,
and that’s how he came to learn
the deep truths of God’s Word.
Brother Weber was fluent
in English, German, and French.
He volunteered to return to Europe
to cultivate the French-speaking field,
and Brother Russell agreed.
Brother Weber went
to his hometown in Switzerland,
and there he placed ads
in French religious newspapers
and found an excellent response to those ads.
Then in 1903,
Brother Russell visited Europe
and arranged with Brother Weber
to publish an eight-page French edition
of the Watch Tower.
And like a zealous regular pioneer,
in the summer, Brother Weber worked
as a woodcutter and a gardener in Switzerland
and then he would travel
to France and to Belgium
to follow up on interested ones
who had responded to his newspaper ads.
He traveled extensively
and gave general oversight to the work
in this French-speaking field in Europe
for over 12 years.
Then in 1912,
Brother Russell visited Europe again
and he appointed a new brother
who was better educated than Brother Weber
to be in charge of the work.
Do you see a potential stumbling block?
Absolutely.
But Brother Weber didn’t even flinch.
He humbly stepped down
and was happy to do whatever he could
to advance Kingdom interests.
Interestingly, that better-educated brother
who replaced Brother Weber
eventually left the truth
and so did four others who succeeded him.
But through all of this,
Brother Weber humbly kept on doing
what he had done for years
—spreading seeds of truth
to honesthearted ones in the field.
Is there a lesson here for us?
Certainly.
Please open your Bibles
to Matthew chapter 23,
and we’ll read verse 12.
This scripture identifies
an outstanding quality of Brother Weber.
Notice the results of showing this quality
—Matthew 23:12:
“Whoever exalts himself will be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
How true this proved to be
in Brother Weber’s case!
Brother Weber
was never looking for recognition,
and yet his experience appears
in the Proclaimers  book,
the 1980 Yearbook, the 1984 Yearbook,
and the 1987 Yearbook  because of all
that good work he did in Europe.
The 1987 Yearbook  gave
this meaningful summary
of Brother Weber’s life.
It said: “Though some had allowed feelings
“of self-importance to overreach them,
“Brother Weber had continued
to serve Jehovah loyally and humbly. . . .
“His modesty, strong faith,
and zealous service
“left a deep impression on all who knew him.
“Finally, at the age of 85,
he finished his earthly course
in February 1948.”
What a fitting tribute
to this humble servant of Jehovah
who was not quick to take offense!
So may we be
like Brother Weber and Sister Romocean.
Let’s maintain a humble,
modest view of ourselves
and stay focused on building
a close relationship with Jehovah.
If we do this,
we will not be quick to take offense
and nothing will make us stumble.